% BLASR(1) 3ca7fe8
%
% July 2015

# NAME

blasr - Map SMRT Sequences to a reference genome.

# SYNOPSIS

**blasr** *reads.bam* *genome.fasta* **-bam** **-out** *out.bam*

**blasr** *reads.fasta* *genome.fasta*

**blasr** *reads.fasta* *genome.fasta* **-sa** *genome.fasta.sa*

**blasr** *reads.bax.h5* *genome.fasta* [**-sa** *genome.fasta.sa*]

**blasr** *reads.bax.h5* *genome.fasta* **-sa** *genome.fasta.sa*
**-maxScore** -100 **-minMatch** 15 ...

**blasr** *reads.bax.h5* *genome.fasta* **-sa** *genome.fasta.sa* **-nproc** 24 **-out** *alignment.out* ...

# DESCRIPTION

**blasr** is a read mapping program that maps reads to positions
in a genome by clustering short exact matches between the read and
the genome, and scoring clusters using alignment. The matches are
generated by searching all suffixes of a read against the genome
using a suffix array. Global chaining methods are used to score
clusters of matches.

The only required inputs to **blasr** are a file of reads and a
reference genome.  It is exremely useful to have read filtering
information, and mapping runtime may decrease substantially when a
precomputed suffix array index on the reference sequence is
specified.

Although reads may be input in FASTA format, the recommended input is
PacBio BAM files because these contain quality value
information that is used in the alignment and produces higher quality
variant detection.
Although alignments can be output in various formats, the recommended
output format is PacBio BAM.
Support for bax.h5 and plx.h5 files will be **DEPRECATED**.
Support for region tables for h5 files will be **DEPRECATED**.

When suffix array index of a genome is not specified, the suffix array is
built before producing alignment. This may be prohibitively slow
when the genome is large (e.g. Human). It is best to precompute the
suffix array of a genome using the program **sawriter**(1),
and then specify the suffix array on the command line using
**-sa** *genome.fa.sa*.

The optional parameters are roughly divided into three categories:
control over anchoring, alignment scoring, and output.

The default anchoring parameters are optimal for small genomes and
samples with up to 5% divergence from the reference genome. The main
parameter governing speed and sensitivity is the **-minMatch** parameter.
For human genome alignments, a value of 11 or higher is recommended.
Several methods may be used to speed up alignments, at the expense of
possibly decreasing sensitivity.

Regions that are too repetitive may be ignored during mapping by
limiting the number of positions a read maps to with the
**-maxAnchorsPerPosition** option. Values between 500 and 1000 are effective
in the human genome.

For small genomes such as bacterial genomes or BACs, the default parameters
are sufficient for maximal sensitivity and good speed.

# OPTIONS

**-h**
:   Print help information

## Input Files

*reads.bam*
:   A PacBio BAM file of reads.
	This is the preferred input to **blasr** because rich quality
	value (insertion,deletion, and substitution quality values) information is
	maintained. The extra quality information improves variant detection and
	mapping speed.

*reads.fasta*
:   A multi-fasta file of reads, though any fasta file is valid input

*reads.bax.h5* | *reads.plx.h5*
:   the old **DEPRECATED** output format of SMRT reads.

*input.fofn*
:   File of file names

**-sa** *suffixArrayFile*
:   Use the suffix array 'sa' for detecting matches between the reads and the
	reference. The suffix array has been prepared by the **sawriter**(1)
	program.

**-ctab** *tab*
:   A table of tuple counts used to estimate match significance.
	This is by the program 'printTupleCountTable'.
	While it is quick to generate on the fly, if there are many invocations of
	**blasr**, it is useful to precompute the ctab.

**-regionTable** *table* (**DEPRECATED**)
:   Read in a read-region table in HDF format for masking portions of reads.
	This may be a single table if there is just one input file,
	or a fofn.  When a region table is specified, any region table inside
	the reads.plx.h5 or reads.bax.h5 files are ignored.

## (DEPRECATED) Options for modifying reads.

There is ancilliary information about substrings of reads
that is stored in a 'region table' for each read file.  Because
HDF is used, the region table may be part of the .bax.h5 or .plx.h5 file,
or a separate file.  A contiguously read substring from the template
is a subread, and any read may contain multiple subreads. The boundaries
of the subreads may be inferred from the region table either directly or
by definition of adapter boundaries.  Typically region tables also
contain information for the location of the high and low quality regions of
reads.  Reads produced by spurious reads from empty ZMWs have a high
quality start coordinate equal to high quality end, making no usable read.

**-useccs**
:   Align the circular consensus sequence (ccs), then report alignments
	of the ccs subreads to the window that the ccs was mapped to.
	Only alignments of the subreads are reported.

**-useccsall**
:   Similar to **-useccs**, except all subreads are aligned, rather than
	just the subreads used to call the ccs.  This will include reads that only
	cover part of the template.

**-useccsdenovo**
:   Align the circular consensus, and report only the alignment of the ccs
	sequence.

**-noSplitSubreads**
:   Do not split subreads at adapters. (Default: false) This is typically only
	useful when the genome in an unrolled version of a known template, and
	contains template-adapter-reverse_template sequence.

**-ignoreRegions**
:   Ignore any information in the region table. (Default: false)

**-ignoreHQRegions**
:   Ignore any hq regions in the region table. (Default: false)

## Alignments To Report

**-bestn** *n* 
:   Report the top *n* alignments. (Default: 10)

**-hitPolicy** *policy*
:   Specify a policy to treat multiple hits from [all (default), allbest, random, randombest, leftmost]

	all
	:	report all alignments.

	allbest
	:   report all equally top scoring alignments.

	random
	:   report a random alignment.

	randombest
	:   report a random alignment from multiple equally top scoring alignments.

	leftmost
	:   report an alignment which has the best alignmentscore and has the
		smallest mapping coordinate in any reference.

**-placeRepeatsRandomly**
:   **DEPRECATED!** If true, equivalent to **-hitPolicy** *randombest*.
	(Default: false)

**-randomSeed** *n*
:   Seed for random number generator. By default (0), use current time as seed.

**-noSortRefinedAlignments**
:   Once candidate alignments are generated and scored via sparse dynamic
	programming, they are rescored using local alignment that accounts
	for different error profiles. Resorting based on the local alignment may
	change the order the hits are returned. (Default: false)

**-allowAdjacentIndels**
:   When specified, adjacent insertion or deletions are allowed. Otherwise,
	adjacent insertion and deletions are merged into one operation. Using
	quality values to guide pairwise alignments may dictate that the higher
	probability alignment contains adjacent insertions or deletions. Current
	tools such as GATK do not permit this and so they are not reported by
	default.

## Output Formats and Files

**-out** *out*
:   Write output to *out*. (Default: stdout)

**-sam**
:   Write output in SAM format.

**-m** *t*
:   If not printing SAM, modify the output of the alignment.
	When *t* is:

	0
	:   Print blast like output with |'s connecting matched nucleotides.

	1
	:   Print only a summary: score and pos.

	2
	:   Print in Compare.xml format.

	3
	:   Print in vulgar format (**DEPRECATED**).

	4
	:   Print a longer tabular version of the alignment.

	5
	:   Print in a machine-parsable format that is read by compareSequences.py.

**-header**
:   Print a header as the first line of the output file describing the contents of each column.

**-titleTable** *tab*
:   Construct a table of reference sequence titles (Default: NULL). The
	reference sequences are enumerated by row, 0,1,... The reference index is
	printed in alignment results rather than the full reference name. This
	makes output concise, particularly when very verbose titles exist in
	reference names.

**-unaligned** *file*
:   Output reads that are not aligned to *file*

**-clipping** [*none*|*hard*|*subread*|*soft*]
:   Use no/hard/subread/soft clipping, ONLY for SAM/BAM output. (Default: none)

**-printSAMQV**
:   Print quality values to SAM output. (Default: false)

**-cigarUseSeqMatch**
:   CIGAR strings in SAM/BAM output use '=' and 'X' to represent sequence
	match and mismatch instead of 'M'. (Default: false)

## Options for anchoring alignment regions.

This will have the greatest effect on speed and sensitivity.

**-minMatch** *m*
:   Minimum seed length. (Default: 12)
	Higher minMatch will speed up alignment, but decrease sensitivity.

**-maxMatch** *l*
:   Stop mapping a read to the genome when the lcp length reaches *l*.
	(Default: inf) This is useful when the query is part of the reference,
	for example when constructing pairwise alignments for de novo assembly.

**-maxLCPLength** *l*
:   The same as **-maxMatch**. (Default: inf)

**-maxAnchorsPerPosition** *m*
:   Do not add anchors from a position if it matches to more than *m*
	locations in the target. (Default: 10000)

**-advanceExactMatches** *E*
:   Another trick for speeding up alignments with match -*E* fewer anchors.
	(Default: 0) Rather than finding anchors between the read and the genome
	at every position in the read, when an anchor is found at position *i* in a
	read of length *L*, the next position in a read to find an anchor is at
	*i*+*L*-*E*. Use this when alignining already assembled contigs.

**-nCandidates** *n* 
:   Keep up to *n* candidates for the best alignment. (Default: 10)
	A large value of *n* will slow mapping because the slower dynamic
	programming steps are applied to more clusters of anchors which can be a
	rate-limiting step when reads are very long.

**-concordant**
:   Map all subreads of a zmw (hole) to where the longest full pass subread of
	the zmw aligned to. (Default: false) This requires to use the region table
	and hq regions. This option only works when reads are in base or pulse h5
	format.

**-concordantTemplate**
:   Select a full pass subread of a zmw as template for concordant mapping.
	(Default: mediansubread)

	longestsubread
	:   use the longest full pass subread
	mediansubread
	:   use the median length full pass subread
	typicalsubread
	:   use the second longest full pass subread if length of the longest full
		pass subread is an outlier

**-fastMaxInterval**
:   Fast search maximum increasing intervals as alignment candidates.
	(Default: false) The search is not as exhaustive as the default, but is
	much faster.

**-aggressiveIntervalCut**
:   Agressively filter out non-promising alignment candidates, if there
	exists at least one promising candidate. (Default: false)
	If this option is turned on,
	**blasr** is likely to ignore short alignments of ALU elements.

**-fastSDP**
:   Use a fast heuristic algorithm to speed up sparse dynamic programming.
	(Default: false)

## Options for Refining Hits

**-sdpTupleSize** *K*
:   Use matches of length *K* to speed dynamic programming alignments.
	(Default: 11) This controls accuracy of assigning gaps in pairwise
	alignments once a mapping has been found, rather than mapping sensitivity
	itself.

**-scoreMatrix** *score_matrix_string*
:   Specify an alternative score matrix for scoring fasta reads.
	The matrix is in the format

	| |A|C|G|T|N|
	|-|-|-|-|-|-|
	|A|a|b|c|d|e|
	|C|f|g|h|i|j|
	|G|k|l|m|n|o|
	|T|p|q|r|s|t|
	|N|u|v|w|x|y|
	| | | | | | |
	
    The values a...y should be input as a quoted space separated
	string: "a b c ... y". Lower scores are better, so matches should be less
	than mismatches e.g. a,g,m,s = -5 (match), mismatch = 6.

**-affineOpen** *value*
:   Set the penalty for opening an affine alignment. (Default: 10)

**-affineExtend** *a*
:   Change affine (extension) gap penalty. Lower value allows more gaps.
	(Default: 0)

## Options for overlap/dynamic programming alignments and pairwise overlap for de novo assembly.


**-useQuality** 
:   Use substitution/insertion/deletion/merge quality values to score gap and
	mismatch penalties in pairwise alignments. (Default: false)
	Because the insertion and deletion rates are much higher than substitution,
	this will make many alignments favor an insertion/deletion over a
	substitution. Naive consensus calling methods will then often miss
	substitution polymorphisms. This option should be used when calling
	consensus using the Quiver method. Furthermore, when not using quality
	values to score alignments, there will be a lower consensus
	accuracy in homopolymer regions.

**-affineAlign**
:   Refine alignment using affine guided align. (Default: false)

## Options for filtering reads and alignments

**-minReadLength** *l* (50)
:   Skip reads that have a full length less than *l*.
	Subreads may be shorter. (Default: 50)

**-minSubreadLength** *l*
:   Do not align subreads of length less than *l*. (Default: 0)

**-minRawSubreadScore** *m* 
:   Do not align subreads whose quality score in region table is less than *m*
	(quality scores should be in range [0, 1000]). (Default: 0)

**-maxScore** *m*
:   Maximum score to output (high is bad, negative good). (Default: -200)

**-minAlnLength**
:   Report alignments only if their lengths are greater than minAlnLength.
	(Default: 0)

**-minPctSimilarity**
:   Report alignments only if their percentage similarity is greater than
	minPctSimilarity. (Default: 0)

**-minPctAccuracy**
:   Report alignments only if their percentage accuracy is greater than
	minAccuracy. (Default: 0)

## Options for parallel alignment

**-nproc** *N*
:   Align using *N* processes. All large data structures such as the suffix
	array and tuple count table are shared. (Default: 1)

**-start** *S*
:   Index of the first read to begin aligning. (Default: 0)
	This is useful when multiple instances are running on the same data,
	for example when on a multi-rack cluster.

**-stride** *S*
:   Align one read every *S* reads. (Default: 1)

## Options for subsampling reads.

**-subsample**
:   Proportion of reads to randomly subsample (expressed as a decimal) and
	align. (Default: 0)

**-holeNumbers** *LIST*
:   When specified, only align reads whose ZMW hole numbers are in *LIST*.
	*LIST* is a comma-delimited string of ranges, such as '1,2,3,10-13'.
	This option only works when reads are in bam, bax.h5 or plx.h5 format.

# CITATION

To cite BLASR, please use: Chaisson M.J., and Tesler G., Mapping
single molecule sequencing reads using Basic Local Alignment with
Successive Refinement (BLASR): Theory and Application, BMC
Bioinformatics 2012, 13:238.

# BUGS
Please report any bugs to https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/blasr/issues.

# SEE ALSO
**loadPulses**(1)
**pls2fasta**(1)
**samFilter**(1)
**samtoh5**(1)
**samtom4**(1)
**sawriter**(1)
**sdpMatcher**(1)
**toAfg**(1)
